[receiver/k8s_objects] Migrate to Kubernetes SharedInformerFactory (#48663)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib: receiver/k8sobjectsreceiver/README.md

- `interval`: Top level pull interval applied to all pull-mode objects that do not set their own `interval`. Falls back to `1h` when neither this field nor the per-resource `objects[*].interval` is set. Has no effect on watch-mode objects.
- `name`: Name of the resource object to collect
- `mode`: define in which way it collects this type of object, either "pull" or "watch".

>   - `pull` mode reads all cached objects at an interval from the in-memory informer cache.

Reviewer: Let's avoid surfacing k8s specific implementation terms like `informer`:
```suggestion
  - `pull` mode reads all objects at an interval from the in-memory cache. The in-memory cache is always update with the latest K8s Objects.
```

>   - `watch` mode uses an informer to maintain a persistent watch connection and stream object change events.

Reviewer: Same as above:

```suggestion
  - `watch` mode maintains a persistent watch connection to the K8s API and stream object change events.
```

- `include_initial_state` (default = `false`): When set to `true` (watch-mode only) the receiver sends a one-time snapshot of the current objects before it starts processing watch events.
- `label_selector`: select objects by label(s)
- `field_selector`: select objects by field(s)
- `objects[*].interval`: per-resource pull interval override. When set, takes precedence over the top-level `interval`. Only applies to `pull` mode objects.
- `exclude_watch_type`: allows excluding specific watch types. Valid values are `ADDED`, `MODIFIED`, `DELETED`, `BOOKMARK`, and `ERROR`. Only usable in `watch` mode.

> - `resource_version`: **Deprecated.** Pinning a starting `resourceVersion` is no longer supported; any value configured here will be ignored.

Reviewer: Same as https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/48663/changes#r3322905114. Is the desired behaviour somehow covered differenly?

Author: It depends on the use case.

If the goal is to avoid re-sending old objects, users can use the `storage` option. I added a commit to support that option again https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/48663#discussion_r3324902165, so they won't lose that capability.

If the goal is to use `resource_version` to resume from where the informer left off and recover objects that changed during a restart, then yes, that capability would be lost.

But honestly, I don’t see a realistic case where a user would manually set `resource_version` without `storage`. resourceVersion is a server-assigned, monotonically increasing value that changes constantly, so it doesn’t make sense to hardcode it in a static config file.

Technically, we could support the `resource_version` option by using a [tweakListOptions](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1#ListOptions) hook to inject:

```go
ResourceVersion=<resource_version>
ResourceVersionMatch=Exact
```

on the first List call.

This would allow the informer to resume from a previous RV, assuming that RV is still available.

That said, I think we should deprecate this field.

---

**First, it ties us to the legacy List+Watch path.**

Kubernetes is moving toward WatchList / streaming initial sync, which is more scalable and is where upstream development is focused:

* KEP: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/3157-watch-list

To resume from a persisted RV, we need `ResourceVersionMatch=Exact` on the initial List. Unfortunately, `Exact` is not compatible with the WatchList path, so keeping `resource_version` would prevent us from adopting the newer sync model.

* Docs: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/api-concepts/#streaming-lists

> When you set sendInitialEvents=true in the query string, Kubernetes also requires that you set resourceVersionMatch to NotOlderThan value.

---

**Second, the practical benefit is pretty small.**

A persisted RV only helps if the process restarts before that RV is compacted away. Otherwise, we still have to do a full relist and lose the intermediate events.

* Doc: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/api-concepts

> A given Kubernetes server will only preserve a historical record of changes for a limited time. Clusters using etcd 3 preserve changes in the last 5 minutes by default.

So we'd be trading future scalability improvements for a small recovery window during short restarts, and only when the hardcoded `resource_version` in the config is still valid, which almost never happens. Since informers are designed to recover current state rather than provide durable event replay, I don't think that tradeoff is worth it.

> - `resource_version`: **Deprecated.** This field is no longer used. The informer manages watch resumption internally, including recovery from 410 Gone responses. Any value configured here will be ignored.

Reviewer 2: > The informer manages watch resumption internally

This is watch-mode specific. We should call out that pinning `resourceVersion` is going away with no replacement.

Author: Thanks for the review! https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/48663/changes/3225c6ad71fa3f5248101a27a8bc5a969863518a

- `kube_api_qps` (default = `5`): Maximum number of queries per second to the Kubernetes API. Increase this if you see `client-side throttling` warnings in the collector logs when watching or polling many resources simultaneously.
- `kube_api_burst` (default = `10`): Maximum burst size for requests to the Kubernetes API. Increase this alongside `kube_api_qps` if you see `client-side throttling` warnings.
- `k8s_leader_elector` (default: none): if specified, will enable Leader Election by using `k8sleaderelector` extension
- `informer_cache_sync_timeout` (default = `10s`): Maximum time to wait for the informer cache to complete its initial sync on startup. If the cache does not sync within this duration, the receiver fails to start.

> - `storage` (default: none): **Deprecated.** The storage extension is no longer used. The informer now handles within-process watch resumption automatically (reconnecting after 410 Gone responses or network blips) without an external storage extension. Note: watch state is in-process only — a pod restart still begins with a fresh list. Any storage extension configured here will be ignored at runtime.

Reviewer: I haven't looked into the implementation yet but I struggle to follow why we deprecate this. This was recently introduced for preventing duplicate events upon restarts. 

Can we analyse how is this covered now and what is the user facing impact here? In general let's discuss first how this change will look like from users' perspective.

Reviewer 3: @kangyili The support for resource version persistence (`storage`) was added so that users can avoid duplicate objects collection. Objects like events can be generated at higher rate in large clusters. Was this deprecation discussed somewhere? 

If we don't have a way to request data from a specific resource_version in informers then the client should parse the objects and drop objects/events which are already sent (object_rv < persisted_rv). This would be a one time processing at the collector restart.

Author: @dhruv-shah-sumo  Just to clarify: are we always using `storage` with` include_initial_state: true` to avoid duplicated objects while still sending new objects at the restart beginning?

If we use `include_initial_state: false` + `storage`,  the current informer solution will not send duplicated objects, since the informer always starts fresh.

Author: I added the storage option back. It will duplicate objects that have already been set, matching the old behavior.
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/48663/changes/3da6e9881ad821c2e91848148b82a044ee84bb00

I also need to touch the component again, because the current storage component lives in the watch-mode package, so I need to extract it.

I think I can split this into separate PRs to make review easier.
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/48765

So eventually the only option we will deprecate is `resource_version`, since it is not natively supported by informers.

Reviewer 3: `include_initial_state` and `storage` are mutually exclusive configurations and they can be set independently by the users according to the use case. We cannot rely on any particular combination of these configurations.

> I added the storage option back. It will duplicate objects that have already been set, matching the old behavior.

You means `It will **drop** duplicate objects that have already been set`, correct?

> I also need to touch the component again, because the current storage component lives in the watch-mode package, so I need to extract it.

Pull-mode sends the entire snapshot at a fixed interval. We would not want to de-duplicate objects in `pull` mode as the user has explicitly opted to get all the objects present. We should keep the `storage` (resource-version persistence) only available to watch-mode.

> So eventually the only option we will deprecate is resource_version, since it is not natively supported by informers.

Deprecating `resource_version` config might be okay.

Author: Yes, it will now drop duplicate objects that have already been set in watch mode when `storage` enabled

> Pull-mode sends the entire snapshot at a fixed interval. We would not want to de-duplicate objects in pull mode as the user has explicitly opted to get all the objects present. We should keep the storage (resource-version persistence) only available to watch-mode.

Yes, I extracted the `storage` package because I need to reuse it in the new informer-watch package. We don't perform any dedup in pull mode.
